---
layout: page
title: Services
---

#Implementation
We design, implement and measure the impact of inclusive technology projects, and explore new ways that technology can facilitate and simplify project objectives. Funded by grants, contracts, or consulting agreements, we work with partners and donors in any and every stage of the implementation process, from the first call for proposals to the final evaluation study. We specialize in organizational and implementation strategy, project execution and delivery, context assessments, technology trainings, monitoring and evaluation, and selecting and troubleshooting technology platforms. [Get in touch](mailto:hello@simlab.org?subject=Implementation) for a one-hour consultation on your project or proposal, and we’ll take it from there.

#Guides, tools, and documentation
A project’s legacy doesn’t end when the last report is filed. We uncover and account for unexpected outcomes of introducing new technology and systems. We draw on our experience and those of our partners to gather and publish case studies, meta-evaluations, best practice toolkits and technology guides. To help organizations achieve internal buy-in, we help agents of change to make the case for innovation with written, audio-visual, and data resources. Throughout, we capture and document learning, and share our results with policymakers, implementers, and the public, so that progress made is made for everyone. We’ll be adding a community dimension to our site which we hope will support anyone using, producing or studying ICTs for development to share learning and solutions&mdash;more on that soon. As long-time practitioners, expert in putting users and communities first, we can provide a viewpoint that few others can. [Let us know what you need.](mailto:hello@simlab.org?subject=Documentation)

#Policy and advocacy
Our experience guiding users and implementing projects has given us a strong, informed perspective on best practices from project implementers, donors, and technology organizations, and a front-row seat to emerging debates. We work with marginalized communities around the world, to provide them the resources they need to make the case for and execute change, both within their own communities and with the organizations that influence them. We’ll conduct research, analyse available literature, and suggest solutions to non-technical challenges. And we make our own case: for informed, thoughtful philanthropy around innovation and technology; for ethical use of data gathered from communities; for sector-wide good practice in our areas of focus.