---
layout: post
title:  "Mobile Money in the Last-Mile of Kenya"
date:   2015-09-04 14:25:00
categories: blog
author: Kelly Church
excerpt: The Brookings Institute’s Financial and Digital Inclusion Project named Kenya as the top scoring country in the world for financial inclusion based on country commitment, mobile capacity, regulatory environment and adoption of traditional and digital financial services. Yet, SIMLab’s experience in rural Kenya over the last 20 months introducing mobile money to organizations in the last mile has come across significant barriers to adoption and sustained use by organizations and end-users alike. 

The event will launch SIMLab’s case study, <Implementing a Mobile Money Management Tool and Training Approach in the Last Mile.> The 24-month long project is funded by the UK Department for International Development (DFID) through the Global Poverty Action Fund (GPAF). The project worked with 40 NGOs and SACCOs (Savings and Credit Cooperatives) in rural Kenya to make the transition from cash to mobile money in a country where 90% of households have used mobile money services. However, SIMLab’s challenges and mid-term findings are that last-mile organizations are not simply awaiting a platform that suits their technical needs to phase in digital cash throughout their business. Rather, complex human, organizational and environmental challenges raise serious questions about the ‘build it, and they will come’ philosophy that has driven much of the mMoney space over the last ten years.

The event will kick off with a presentation by Kelly Church, Project Director, highlighting learnings and challenges from the project; Leo Tobias, Technology Team Manager at Grameen Foundation, presenting on their work in Uganda; Sean McDonald, CEO of FrontlineSMS, reflecting on the very real obstacles caused by fractured operator, handset and software markets. We will be joined by Kay McGowan, Digital Finance Team Lead at USAID, who will offer her reflections and responses to the panelists’ presentations, and share some of the direction of USAID policy as the mMoney field approaches its ninth year. Together the panel will shed light on similar experiences within and beyond Kenya, and look critically at what is being done and what needs to be done at the technology and policy level to ensure the next five years will bring greater, more widespread and engaged adoption of mobile financial services.
